UW–Madison to celebrate investiture of Chancellor Jennifer Mnookin with series of special events
https://www.cs571.org/s23/hw9/api/news/images/investiture
chancellor,campus

On April 14, in keeping with one of the oldest traditions in academia, Chancellor Jennifer L. Mnookin will be formally welcomed as the University of Wisconsin–Madison’s 30th leader during a ceremony known as an investiture.

“The installation of a new chancellor is an historic moment for a university,” says Karen Walsh, president of the University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents. “In Chancellor Mnookin, we have a leader who brings great passion, experience and vision to the role. This is an exciting time for our flagship university and an opportunity to celebrate all it has achieved and all the wonderful things still to come.”

The week of the ceremony will also involve a series of associated events that will highlight UW–Madison’s research, teaching and public service missions; provide opportunities to reflect on the university’s accomplishments and goals; and celebrate the contributions of the entire campus community to the university’s success. Traditionally, an investiture takes place during the first year of new leadership.

“UW–Madison has so much to be proud of and so many reasons to be excited about the future,” Mnookin says. “Throughout the week, we will be celebrating this extraordinary campus and its history of discovery, excellence and educational opportunity, while also celebrating our community and our connections to this great state.”

The ceremony will include an address by Mnookin and a formal academic procession of delegates from universities around Wisconsin and the nation, as well as civic and elected officials. A campus community celebration and picnic on Library Mall will follow the investiture ceremony and is open to all students, faculty, staff and guests.

“It’s important for a great public research institution like UW–Madison to have traditions that honor its past, present and future,” says Wisconsin Foundation and Alumni Association CEO Mike Knetter. “The investiture of Chancellor Mnookin is one of those special occasions. It’s a time for us to come together and build community while looking ahead to the future.”

Mnookin, whose tenure began Aug. 4, 2022, is a national expert on law, forensic science and evidence, and she has deep experience as an innovative and talented administrator. Before joining UW–Madison, Mnookin was dean of the University of California, Los Angeles School of Law and the Ralph and Shirley Shapiro Professor of Law. Prior to joining UCLA Law, Mnookin was professor of law and Barron F. Black Research Professor at the University of Virginia School of Law. She was also a visiting professor of law at Harvard Law School.

Since she arrived on campus, Chancellor Mnookin has met with hundreds of people statewide, including community leaders and elected officials, and she delivered an address to the University of Wisconsin System Board of Regents, in which she highlighted the university’s priorities and strengths. There, she also announced a program, Bucky’s Pell Pathway, to meet the full financial need of Wisconsin students from low-income households.

Most of the investiture-week events will be free and open to the public. Many showcase the tremendous impact that students, faculty, staff and alumni have on the community and beyond. The university’s investiture website has full details.